Trauma is any event that does not correspond with everyday situations and can give rise to feelings of severe stress and unhappiness (Wicks-Nelson & Israel, 1997). Emotional struggles as a result of interpersonal trauma could steer emotional vulnerability as feelings of violation and betrayal reside within the sufferer (Lilly & London, 2015). Such feelings can disrupt an individual's emotional response system and lead to internal regulation difficulties at a later stage (Barlow, Goldsmith-Turow, & Gerhart, 2017).
If trauma has been inflicted on a child by their parent(s), their core belief system recognizes that a secure attachment style has not been formed and is deficient in protection, prompting emotional hesitation. A sense of safety and support is paramount in the early years to encourage a child to explore their environment confidently and independently, despite any possibility of failure (van Rosmalen, van de Horst, & van der Veer, 2016).
In the case where a child becomes familiar with traumatic events, the onset of behavioral issues increases (Galletly, Van Hoof, & McFarlane, 2011; Connell, Pittenger, & Lang, 2018) because the victim's neurological structure changes in accordance with the adversities experienced or witnessed. Therefore, resulting in the risk of psychopathology development (Dye, 2018).
This research examines trauma in terms of physical, sexual and emotional abuse and uses this to understand future consequences and management strategies following personal hardship. This study researches the link between three consequences of childhood trauma that have appeared in previous literature: 1. Depression and anxiety. 2. Sleep disturbance. 3 Low self-esteem. Alongside three coping mechanisms: 1. Denial. 2. Alcohol and drug abuse. 3. self-isolation. The reason for this selection was to identify if similarities and differences existed between previous research and this study.
1.1. Consequences of childhood trauma
1.1.1. Depression and anxiety
Childhood trauma has been linked to the development of anxiety and depression in later life (Hovens et al., 2010) and a history of abuse may be more identifiable by adulthood as emotional and behavioral patterns have evolved by this period. As of this, various disorders are likely to arise among childhood abuse victims (Lindert et al., 2014).
More specifically, the connection between depression, anxiety and childhood trauma could be related to the individual's neurological response system. Repeated childhood exposure to severe stressors causes excessive transmission of stress hormones in the body, as a way of responding to the event(s) that are happening around them (Heim et al., 2008). Regular exposure to toxic conditions in childhood can distort the biological makeup of the body's Hypothalamic-Pituitary-Adrenal (HPA) axis. This neurological system sends signals to the brain to alert the body of dangerous circumstances. When the HPA axis is over activated the secretion of stress hormones creates a surplus and the body remains alert in preparation to react to perceived harmful situations through the fight-flight-freeze system (Butler et al., 2017; Maack et al., 2015). If a state of readiness through this system occurs frequently, it permits over activation throughout childhood and later promotes the risk of depressive and anxiety disorders due to heightened cortisol levels following traumatic episodes.