What are the effects of climate change on biodiversity?
Climate change is dramatically shaping our world today. But its consequences are not limited to humans alone. It also has far-reaching effects on the world’s biodiversity. Let's explore how climate change and biodiversity are interlinked – and how tackling one can help the other.

Climate change is an undeniable reality that is dramatically shaping our world today. Its impacts are profound, from rising temperatures and melting ice caps to extreme weather. But its consequences are not limited to humans alone. It also has far-reaching effects on the world’s biodiversity. This is often overlooked, yet it is interlinked.

In just over 40 years, wildlife populations showed a dramatic decline of 69% on average. The IPCC reports that around 20-30% of species could die out if global mean temperatures go up by 1.5-2.5 degrees. Yet the global average surface temperature has risen by roughly 1 degree Celsius. The data speaks for itself, painting a clear picture of the current state of biodiversity and climate change.

The effects of climate change on biodiversity
Biodiversity, or the ‘diversity of life’ on Earth, is essential for the planet’s health and survival. But the effects of climate change are becoming increasingly clear. Extreme weather events are happening more often. The timing of biological events is changing. Our wildlife is disappearing. But its impacts are not felt the same across the planet, as some regions and species are more at risk than others. 

Climate change is having a greater impact on the poles, tropical rainforests, and coastal areas than anywhere else in the world. This could have far-reaching consequences for the planet’s health; and our future.

Rising global temperatures leads to habitat loss on land and sea
Rising global temperatures, also known as ‘global warming’, is one of the most important aspects of climate change. It refers to the increasing greenhouse gases, like CO2 and methane, in the atmosphere, which trap the sun’s heat. This trapped heat is related—directly or indirectly—to widespread habitat loss on both land and in the sea.

On the surface, polar ice caps and glaciers are melting. This is causing sea levels to rise and encroach on coastal habitats and the Arctic tundra. Not only this, but global rainfall patterns are being affected as well. The changes in weather patterns can lead to extreme environmental changes, like ‘desertification’. This is when wild habitats like grasslands or shrublands slowly turn into deserts. 

In the oceans, CO2 concentrations are now higher than they have been in the past 800,000 years. As a result, our seas are getting warmer, and the oceans are becoming more acidic. These conditions are known to cause mass coral bleaching. To date, scientists have identified six coral bleaching events since 1998, most notably on the Great Barrier Reef. This is of concern since coral reefs are one of the most biodiverse and valuable ecosystems on Earth.
Changing weather patterns disrupt seasonal lifecycles and events
Climate change also affects biodiversity by disturbing the timing of natural cycles and events. Frequent changes in weather patterns, such as early springs or warm winters, can disrupt the natural rhythm of life. Animals often take cues from their environment when making important decisions, like when to migrate or when to reproduce. So any big changes in weather patterns can mean biological events fall out of sync and happen at different times. For example, birds arriving at breeding grounds when the food source is scarcer. This can threaten their survival as well as their breeding efforts.

Climate breakdown can also lead to an unpredictable outcome for the functioning of entire ecosystems. In almost all cases, biodiversity declines despite a ‘degree of redundancy’, such as a species being replaced by another. For example, the number of North American monarch butterflies has been shrinking over the years. And this decline has been linked to climate change.

Extreme weather and frequent weather-related disasters harms wildlife
Climate change is causing extreme weather like storms, floods and wildfires to happen more often and be more severe. Such tragic events not only affect humans, but they also destroy habitats and kill wildlife. As an example, the 2019-20 Australian bushfires burned almost 19 million hectares of land. It also affected nearly three billion animals, including koalas, wombats, kangaroos and wallabies. Besides, they can have long-term effects on the remaining survivors and even us, humans.

We can also see the effects of weather-related disasters on biodiversity in the UK. According to the National Trust, the extreme weather in 2022 was very bad for UK wildlife. Dried-up rivers and streams affected wild populations of natterjack toads in northwest England. The shorter flowering season also meant less food for insects and birds, such as bumblebees, butterflies and redwings.