Abstract:
With the advent of technology and globalization, the level of interaction is very high, and people are close to each other, due to this the social communication and exchange of values, opinions, and cultures are at their peak. This certainly plays a very important role in the society to understand new culturism and allows people to interact and mix with people from other parts of the world, accept other cultures, and express them in a variety of ways in order to promote economic development and accelerate social and indigenous progress. Media globalization and social change accelerate the flow of information and mutual intrusions of all kinds of cultures, which results in the assimilation of culture and its values and beliefs. The majority of people in society accept mass culture under the banner of pop culture. Cultural identity is a concept that exists in today’s globalized world but may have drastic change in recent decades. Considering all these facts, youth and cultural identity are inextricably linked. In the present era, the youth represent the main idea of cultural identity as they are frequently accepting new values and cultural patterns. Modern culture is a component of social development, and the impact of globalization and the development of the information society have given social capital a new direction. The effect of changing faces of people, especially the youth, is well marked in their expression as a popular culture. Popular culture is a kind of popularized culture among the masses, which is an outcome of media and social interactions. The representation of high culture and mass culture gives a new style to the traditional concept and is represented as a popular culture in the present scenario. The youth are very prone to change and symbolize popular culture. This is largely accepted by the majority of society’s members. The current study looked at the impact of traditional and modern factors on the emergence of cultural identity in the younger generation. The current study examines the growth and development of a new culture in society based on experience and perception that strengthens the youth group’s identity. The methodology used in the study was primary.

Keywords:
Culture, Popular culture, Media, Identity, Traditional Perception, Society, Ethnicity, Ideology, Globalisation.

Introduction

Culture is the primary characteristic of a specific group of people who share a common language, religion, values, and social identities. Many scholars define culture as patterns of activities and communication, cognitive structures, and understanding acquired in the context of socialization. Thus, it can be seen as an increase in group identity, which is stimulated by the social patterns that characterize this group. Culture includes basic factors of social togetherness and living such as religion, social values, food, our language, music, and ways of living with varying frequencies of interactions. Southgate College in London mentioned that the word "culture" is shorthand for socially shared symbols, values, beliefs, attitudes, and cultural identities passed down through generations.

Actually, the culture in the present scenario intended to suit to the taste and understanding of social phenomenon to connect the society and social capitals to enhance the change in the social scenario because culture has become the key to our interconnected world, which consists of so many ethnically diverse societies, religion, ethnicity, ethical beliefs. It also can be concluded that popular culture is a kind of cultural transformation due to the great influence of media and media contents; it certainly has a variety of perspectives such as economic, political, sociological, and historical. Popular culture is influenced by all of the sociological factors and issues that are happening around us in the current scenario of media globalization, and it is acceptable to the majority of people in society. In the present time of the digital revolution and the expansion of globalization, people are living in a global village and have very close contact with everyone. People can communicate effectively and efficiently around the world. Global communication has given a new face to cultural change and the development of a new era of cultural communication where regional restrictions and cultural barriers are also playing a very effective role in social development. Globalization and social transformation are acting as a catalyst to accelerate and influence all of the fundamental elements of the original culture, known as pop culture. Popular culture strongly influences the thinking and behavioural patterns of social capital and the mind-set of society. The people are changing, and the youth are active practitioners of popular culture, which was influenced by the media and global variables.